The sad state of Python on Windows
##################################
:date: 2015-03-24 19:06
:author: ispmarin
:category: ciência
:slug: 573
:status: draft

The last post was about how the multiple libraries and installation
paths for a sane developer environment for Python on Linux was turning
into a Windows-style ordeal. Today, with another flamebait title, I'll
tell the sad state of trying to do some Python work on a Windows
machine, with and without Admininstrator rights. First of all, I'm not
blaming Python developers or Windows developers. What I'm trying to say
is that the combination of both turns out to be very problematic to use
Python on Windows.

First off, installing Python without admin rights is outright
impossible. I tried every combination of directories and permissions,
and without admin rights, no dice. The `portable
Python <http://portablepython.com/>`__\ also didn't work properly (more
on that later), to my despair, and are outdated. Even on the Python
installation pages nothing is said about admin rights. Is it normal to
assume that everyone has admin rights on its own machine? The only
formats available on the official Python page are
`MSIs <https://www.python.org/downloads/release/python-279/>`__\ that
need to be installed with with admin rights.

(To be fair, I think that trying to install Python on a Debian machine
without sudo would be a royal pain, but it would be possible. Also,
Python is a requirement for several if not all Linux distros, so that is
a non issue.)

Ok,
