How to learn Physics (and Mathematics) with History
###################################################
:date: 2015-08-18 19:26
:author: ispmarin
:category: f√≠sica, physics
:tags: learning, mathematics, physics, statistics
:slug: how-to-learn-physics-and-mathematics-with-history
:status: published

Watching the new Cosmos series about Faraday I was struck by a very
simple thought: seeing how things evolved made simpler for me to
understand physical concepts. I don't know if I had that epiphany before
or if that's common, but for me it was a revelation. Very simple things,
like magnetic fields, were way more clear after showing what Faraday was
trying to achieve and was thinking than any Electromagnetism A that I
did as an undergrad. And I believe that this might help my new endeavor:
understanding probability deeply.

I've been reading Lady Luck, by Warren Weaver, and I'm loving it. It has
a very unique balance between telling the history of probability with
showing the basic concepts in a very clear way. Another fantastic thing
about this book is that it doesn't save on words: Warren repeats and
repeats what it is and what is not, so it's perfectly clear on every
moment what he's talking about. That's uncommon for a math book: usually
the authors assume that everyone knows what he means and that a beginner
easily can understand everything that is going on when a formula or a
concept is demonstrated. The terror of physicists - "it can be easily
demonstrated" is avoided at all costs. The trade off is that sometimes
verbosity can be a little tiresome, but for me it has a clarity that I
wished all my undergrad textbooks had. And that's the connection between
the Cosmos episode and this book: both show the concepts from a basic
point of view, but they excel in going deep in the subject without being
condescending or jumping "obvious" steps, showing the history behind
that idea and how it came to be.

At least on my first years as a Physics undergrad, all students were
eager to experiment, to go hands on the physics labs or the observatory.
Two things were hammered down on us, one good and one bad. The good one
was that we had to have method: just poking things randomly would not
take us very far, as fun as it was. Teaching this method (called,
despite all controversy, the scientific method) was one of the best
things that I could have learned as an undergrad. The bad thing was that
we were buried in math courses without any kind of context. On the first
year alone we had an ordinary and partial differential equations course,
a analytical geometry course, two calculus courses and a basic
programming course, plus some optional advanced physics math courses. I
know that this is common on physics courses, but those were just dumped
on us. Some physics teachers tried to give us context, but it was more
on the ping-pong version ("this you will see on your calculus course",
"this you will see on your physics course" and so on) and not very
helpful. This demotivated me and several other students. Why did we need
to learn all this calculus and geometry without any tangible reason?
(The "you're going to need this to understand that" is not very helpful,
at all. You don't know that yet!). Only after my first classical
mechanics course things started to make more sense, and got better with
a great electromagnetism teacher that showed how things were put
together by Maxwell and Faraday.

Maybe this is about the "math first"or "physics first" dilemma for a
Physics course. If you already know the math you can concentrate on the
Physics ideas and results. If you know the physics principles before,
the math is the best support for those ideas to flourish and be useful.
(On an aside, I don't agree with a teacher that I had that said "all you
need is the physical intuition, the math is the easy part! Follow your
intuition!" and every time we needed the math, he would fail.) I can see
both sides now and would propose a third option: teach the history
first. With the context things would be easier on both sides, the ideas
would permeate the ideas on both sides and maybe provide more support
for thought and understanding. This maybe would prevent the effect of
trusting only on the math, without reflecting what the math is telling
you. As another great teacher said, "What is a sign? It's the difference
of sending the astronaut to the moon or killing him!"
